Who can participate in clinical trials?
Both people who are healthy and those with illnesses (patients) can participate in clinical trials.
I will explain 1) why people volunteer to participate in clinical trials,
2) what people who participate in clinical trials should expect, and
and 3) what the inclusion and exclusion criteria are for participating in clinical trials.
Why are healthy people encouraged to participate in clinical trials?
Results from tests on healthy volunteers, such as a blood test or imaging device like an MRI,
help define the baseline against which patient groups are compared to help identify a disease.
Researchers learn about the disease process by comparing the patient group to the healthy volunteers.
Participants’ characteristics in healthy groups are often matched to their patient groups on factors such as age, gender, or family history.
The only difference between the healthy volunteer and patient is that the patient has an illness, whereas the healthy volunteer does not.
Would patient volunteers benefit from participating in a clinical trial?
Research with a patient volunteer helps develop new knowledge
to better understand, diagnose, or treat that disease or condition.
You may benefit by receiving tested medicine or treatment before it is made available to the general public,
but its effect depends on the stage of knowledge about the disease or condition.
What may you expect from participating in a clinical trial? What do you need to know?
Your participation may be time consuming.
Some trials are short, while others require more time and commitment.
There are some points at which you may not feel comfortable.
There are also some risks to participating in a clinical trial.
Even if you are a healthy volunteer, there is an informed consent process that ensures that you fully understand the clinical trial process and any risks.
Not everyone who is a patient participant will receive the treatment.
It is likely that the patient study group will be split up into two treatment groups,
with one group receiving the treatment and the other receiving a placebo treatment.
There is a very low chance that there is any benefit to receiving the placebo.
What are the criteria/qualifications for participation in a clinical trial look like?
Researchers follow clinical trials guidelines when deciding who can participate in a study.
Should you not meet the requirements listed in the inclusion/exclusion criteria, you will not be able to participate in the study.
These criteria are based on factors such as age, gender, the type and severity of a disease,
treatment history, and other medical conditions.
You must provide this information to the research team before joining a clinical trial.
Inclusion and exclusion criteria are not used to reject people personally.
Instead, the criteria are used to identify appropriate participants and keep them safe,
and to help ensure that researchers can find new information they need.